hey this is Adam steal from the organics
dotnet and you are listening to 100 days
of SEO what's up everybody welcome back
to 100 days of SEO my name is Brendan
Hufford I do SEO from everyday ranging
from 90 million dollar venture back
startups to local window washers and
today I have the pleasure of sharing
with you an interview that I did with
Adam Steele Adam is very kind
wonderfully Canadian and one of the most
badass link builders he would never
describe himself that way but he is one
of the most badass link builders on the
planet if you look at who's following
Adam on Twitter it's not ten thousand
people or a hundred thousand people but
it is everybody smart in SEO when it
comes to link building they all follow
Adam so I hope you love this interview
you'll definitely learn something about
advanced link building huge mistakes
that beginners and advanced SEO czar
making when it comes to link building
Adams just a wealth of knowledge is
gonna make you rethink a lot of what
you've been taught and what you've
learned about SEO and that's because
Adam has rethought a lot of what he's
done for his agency log annex in the
past six months so I hope you enjoy
let's do it Adam thanks for joining us
for a hundred days of SEO dude thanks
for having me it's awesome absolutely
man so I already did like a brief intro
in that you know I guess I'm really
curious there's so much in SEO it can be
so overwhelming for somebody trying to
learn it or trying to like figure out
like what do I what's my next step like
what do i do first and what I really
want to kind of ask you about is like
how do you like what's your framework
for thinking about SEO if you wanted to
help somebody whether they have a new
website or an existing website they want
to get more traffic to their website
from search you know what do you
prioritize like how do you think about
SEO a lot of folks come to me to to my
team look annex they're oftentimes their
agencies or they're the digital
marketing manager at a brand of some
sort so they already have like a pretty
good understanding of their on-site
stuff what they're coming to me for is
usually their off-site stuff so be it
link building or citation building GMB
stuff that kind of thing so the
questions
typically get revolve around bats I just
try and look at the SERP and figure out
what is going on there and I'll spend a
bunch of time just looking at the
different competitors and seeing what is
it that they're doing that we might be
able to to copy essentially which is
certainly nothing new and on the local
end I'll just kind of just look at the
top ranking GM be like are they surface
area businesses are they not are they if
they are service area businesses are
they hiding their address or are they
choosing not to hide their address how
many reviews do they have I'll look at
the citation stuff even though it's kind
of a little less important nowadays and
just kind of just go down this list that
doesn't exist of different things that
that might come to mind that might you
know we might be missing or that we
ought to off to do ourselves and if it's
just a purely organic issue almost
always I'll just start an address I'll
just punch the site their site in I'll
punch save the top three top five most
likely competitors in and they'll just
kind of try and figure out if if we have
any shot here and if we do where we're
best focus of budget cuz a lot of most
when when I get approached almost always
there is a budget like there is they say
2k or there is 5k or 10k a month or
something so it is sort of a set budget
and I have to take that and decide do we
have any chance here or should we walk
away from this fight and focus on a
different sir mmm
but it kind of I don't know if that
answers your question but that's sort of
how I approach in sort of a very
abstract way yeah well I want to move on
to something in a second but I didn't
want to pull I guess I'm just curious
like eight reps was is one of the first
sponsors of a hundred days of SEO I'm a
nature ups user obviously who are to
where do you find like the most the tool
can do a lot of different things where
do you find like what does the most
valuable part of that tool for you like
where do you find a lot of value in it
yeah I don't get too fancy with it I
know I've learned a lot from
other folks who really dug deep and a
trance but for me site Explorer is my
bread and butter so I just I get in
there and and I would use every little
feature available to me to sort of
dissect usually a competitor's link
profile and be like type of Link's so
you know what it was is it a comment
link as a format for forum link is it a
contextual link it's those Sokka what's
what is sort of the overall theme of the
referring links what is the theme of the
referring domains are they relevant are
they not relevant are they more general
so I'm kind of looking at that to get
some sense of what do I have to do to do
as well as as they are again nothing
particularly new yeah yeah good point
I use it a lot too and I pull out pretty
much every everything that's along the
left sidebar I just play with endlessly
and try to find I like that they're
starting to show internal links they're
not really always accurate but it's cool
too because it's such an easy win for
clients to be like hey like we can get
you these links from other websites but
you can also just link to it from your
own website because we found these three
pieces of content that you've only link
to in one place so yeah the super
helpful it's a super old-school like
every we've had we've been doing
internal linking for forever but if it's
been my experience among the websites
I've seen big and not big internal
linking is super super underutilized
yeah especially if you have what ends up
happening is you people don't I think
it's really a system of like revising
content right they never go back and
update stuff so imagine you're this huge
venture-backed startup and it's just go
go go go go fast fast feed execute
everything you're putting out all of
this content it's all really good but
you don't go back to this killer article
you wrote you know a while back and link
to you know you're not going back and
like linking to your new stuff from your
old stuff and really having any sort of
thoughtfulness or at least what I've
experienced for the most part people
just have an article they link to the
old stuff and they write a new article
I'm like off the camera write a new
article link to the old stuff another
new one link to the old stuff but it
never
goes back the other way and I think it's
a really big missed opportunity and it's
definitely a mistake I see a lot of
people make what um when it comes to you
know off page SEO we'll focus on that
specifically what is what are some like
the beginner mistakes that you see
people making when it comes to like link
building guest posting just all the
things that make up off page SEO I'll
touch on citations and I'll touch on
sort of more traditional link building
citation wise I think it was Once Upon a
Time drilled into our head that it was
super super important to be 100%
consistent you have your name address
phone number 100% consistent across all
profiles I think there's a lot more
leeway than we know in that you can do
very very well and not be all that
consistent so I think I don't know if
that's a myth or what-have-you but I
just think there's a lot more
flexibility than we know there as far as
the citations are concerned it seems to
me that and when I say the sort of seems
to me it is what I sort of see in in the
wild looking at lots and lots of these
different SERPs is that it's not some
citation building is not something you
need to obsess over I usually tell my
clients like let's get it done in month
one let's get it over with and let's
pretty much not return to it ever again
you just do it once and if you do a
right you really don't have to return to
it doesn't need to be a monthly effort
you just don't need to obsess about it
and it seems like there's kind of you
know once you have say a hundred one
hundred and twenty five hundred and
fifty they really like anything beyond
that seems to have very small small
value but diminishing returns if you
will so if it doesn't seems to be to
seem to be
aside from local based citation it
doesn't seem to be you know that many
sort of structured directory style
listings beyond that that are better
worthwhile if I would say and and the
local citations when I talk about like a
local citation I'd be more of a a
locally folks you may be a director
based in Philadelphia Delphia that just
does Philadelphia based businesses that
would be a structured local specific
citation source or place where you can
get your citation there's a lot there's
those are whole lines in my opinion like
those you could get a little bit
obsessive about but that's also for that
referring link as well just the citation
itself so you can kind of go down that
rabbit hole and it'll have much more
value beyond just the citation itself on
the organic or link building side of
things I think a common mistake I come
from the link building world so I have
somewhat different viewpoint I suppose
because that is a lot of what I do like
every single day only what I do every
single day what I see is a lot of folks
being very okay with links from guest
post sites or sites that accept guest
content or guest contributions that seem
to have given up on their own
contributions and are now just running
this site for money generated from
taking these paid links so like they may
post ten times a month and of those ten
times eight of them are paid and so it's
like paid article paid article paid
article their own article paid article
paid article paid article and it just
looks to me like such a fat footprint
and it seems like that could get people
in a good bit of hot soup down the road
and yet it seems like so so so many are
okay with
that so I think that's something to to
watch out for down the road because they
I mean if I think it's a foot footprint
then goodness
Google must know and see and be able to
figure out that this is an obvious
footprint so I I think that's something
that that kind of freaks me out a bit
and I think maybe should freak other
people out just a bit more yeah we
remember when I started doing a lot of
link building a couple years ago for
clients and even myself you know we're
told to use like the search operators of
like you know it does it do they have
the words right for us or become a
country contributor or whatever and you
find that you get this big list and if
you were like me and you were broke you
just use Gmail to reach out or if you
have more money you use you know we're
fancy around here now so we use pitch
box but like you use these tools or
whatever you reach out and I think what
you're saying is also something I've
seen which is like they look good the
metrics still look okay you know if we
look at like secondary metrics so they
still have good search traffic do they
still you know a chess set gives like a
traffic estimate do they have a good
close trust flow and citation flow do
they have like a good overall authority
and even if they still have these things
you just can't help but wonder like how
long is that going to last
they're just it's just yeah and they
just degrade over time like how much is
that link you know it's great that we
got it for a client or ourselves or
whatever we're working on but if the
only place you're guest posting is where
everybody is guest posting those web
sites are going to turn into and you
remember do you remember ezinearticles
and old school I feel like they're gonna
turn into ezinearticles real quick or
like everybody in SEO found out you
could just spam the heck out of this
thing and write 500 articles you know it
just turns into that it's not really
working you can't stop at the metrics
that I made that mistake in previous
years where you know I had a number of
different agencies come to me and say I
want a minimum of TF this on what
minimum of
çf this I want the TTFN to look like
this I want the dr to be greater than
this etcetera etcetera and so I
basically took the list or many many
many lists for talking tens of thousands
well over a hundred thousand in basic
gathered data by a different api's ran
scripts that we we built up over time
and just sorted them and anything below
those metrics was cut off and then
everything else was good but it wasn't
good this year we started going through
every single one of those days at those
domains and this is super not scalable
but super important doing a manual
review and looking at the type of
linking behavior that is going on on
these sites looking at the the traffic
growth or decline over time as parade
rafts and all those kinds of sort of
things that are just harder to automate
I suppose I could be hard to automate I
would think to pull traffic growth or or
decline over time and then pull that
into a spreadsheet how the hell you
would do that or how many comments on
average these posts get or social
activity that these posts get or all
those kinds of things are they linking
out to bad sort of sites casino sites
loan sites all that kind of thing how
you automate that is beyond me so we
just manually look at this stuff and it
takes a horribly long time but I think
that's just being responsible I would I
would think mm-hmm tell me um what do
you think as far as what about people
who know the game so people who
understand the value of links and
understand they have like a general
understand this is something I'm I'm not
dealing with but it's a hurdle that I
think people have to overcome that they
have to actually get them put themselves
out there and build relationships SEO is
very much about relationships and I
think that's as it should be right
there's a human behind every web so
the more that we want websites to be
related to each other in the form of
links or whatever else usually if you
look at somebody's website and you look
at their backlink profile it's most
often if it's a good honest website not
like a huge company or anything building
a personal website it's just gonna be a
list of links to their friends right
people they have actual relationships
with and in the SEO for the rest of us
this course of course I launched not
that long ago really teaching people of
like you've got to email people you've
got to reach out and like make friends
in there like really and it's like yeah
it doesn't have to be some spammy look
like terrible you know you get those
emails I'm sure all the time that are
just like requesting links or trying to
do whatever and it's like nobody likes
getting those but if you just reach out
like take your time and reach out like a
real genuine human it works it's not
super scalable but like you do have to
form relationships so that's kind of
like more on the beginner side of things
what about advanced SEO it's like are
there any mistakes obviously people come
to you to help them with this even
agencies and stuff like what are
mistakes that advance people kind of
make when they're trying to do it on
their own I get to every with every
conference that I go to I kind of
realized how not advanced I yeah I don't
know anything anymore
it's frustrating how little I actually
know I know like this this little tiny
niche sliver of SEO fortunately it's
kind of a big thing like the link but
still there's just so much I think if I
have to come up with something which I
do and sort of taking the theme that you
were kind of riffing about just just a
moment ago I think more time could be
spent offering value to these folks that
you're reaching out to so an example and
I think I'm stealing this from shoot I
forget her name she spoke at traffic
think tank live I want to say it's Nadia
or something similar she's from Ben gage
mmm-hmm
and so if I'm stealing from this from
her please give her credit for it
but one of the things we started to do a
lot is when we approach a site
we approach them with hey I did some
keep you know I I recognize that your
business or your your website is is in
this sort of niche I get some keyword
research in this niche I noticed that
your competitors tend to rank quite well
for these particular terms I think these
terms have a lot of commercial intent
for the way that you're trying to
monetize I think I could write a
fantastic piece of content on this
particular topic
here are the keywords I would use I
would run it through to you know
something like write or whatever they do
you know do the TVI IDF and I would
really put some time into this and I
think on the back end of this you could
earn say a thousand fifteen hundred more
organic visits every single month
should I be able to do this right for
you so coming from a place of value and
having done that research upfront the
research itself takes five minutes it
doesn't really take that long just
somebody who knows their way around a
giraffe's can figure can be taught this
like a virtual assistant can be taught
this so it is scalable in my opinion so
I think yeah coming coming from a place
of doing your homework and and a place
of this may convert for you I see how
you're monetizing if we can bring this
traffic in I think it might mean money
for you that way you most times you
don't have to pay for those sites like
you don't have to pay some contributor
you don't have to pay for somebody's you
know their media kit fee or what have
you
yeah absolutely and I totally agree I
think that the it's always about like
figuring out what the industry is right
cuz I know that I'm some industries like
I reached out and it was we were doing a
lot of outreach and things just weren't
landing really well and I was like I
don't know I don't know what this is and
then we tried just something real
straightforward it was in like the
digital marketing online marketing space
and we were like hey this is a link
request from a real person like in the
just put some personality into it and
like we got a lot of response because
people appreciated that it was
straightforward it wasn't some veil like
it was just I would like a link from you
here's why I'm qualified you've probably
heard of us kind of thing and like that
makes sense
versus like you know reaching out
construction websites or something like
that or you know even some home
improvement ones where it's like you
know set you have to like look at them
and do like you said a couple seconds or
research you'd be like oh this is
somebody who does have like their SEO
game kind of on point like I can talk to
them about keywords versus another one
where you know you pitch one website and
you're like hey here's some keywords and
here's this traffic and they're like
look I don't really are you selling
something and it gets confusing say it
seems like you just have oversold it
right so I don't know I but I do think
that there's definitely there's
definitely something to that tell me um
when with the work that you're doing
with organics and stuff tell me I would
love to hear like one of your kind of as
a last question like your biggest
learning as you went through your lists
and really audited it and not pruned
isn't the right word but just you wanted
to really increase the quality of what
you had there
what was some of your big learnings from
that I think pruned isn't the right word
I think it wasn't like massacred it went
from something like a hundred thousand
to I don't know that we've come up with
a thousand yet I think we're somewhere
in the 500 to 600 this is the same list
that everybody has it's same list I oh I
won't name names but you search guest
post service in in Google right now
everybody on first page has the same
list they're being shocked to everybody
right so everybody has you know fifty
thousand twenty thousand a hundred
thousand sites right so we just went
through that list and we decided what
are what we could automate and
everything that was be you know less
than than whatever metrics was gone so
now we had say ten thousand and then we
tried to run it you know create sort of
a bought to automate some of the stuff
that we
would have to be manual got rid of a
bunch more I think I kind of spoke
already to to some of the things that we
notice is just how much paid activity
there was just an incredible amount of
of buying links and no surprise I mean
everybody has these lists these the
lists that are being shopped around by
brokers I think one of the most more
interesting things that I noticed is
suppose it's not a surprise or wouldn't
come a surprises the more paid activity
and that occurred be more likely that
when I pulled them up in a drafts
they're trafficked or organic traffic as
per a dress which is an estimate at best
it's going down down down down down down
it just seems the way it goes it's once
they stop investing in their own good
content they're just getting SEO content
or they're just getting inexpensive $15
an article content and it does nothing
for their site it just I think it's
water is down their site overall because
it's not written to rank for anything
it's just just some filler content that
may make total sense like you read it
it's like okay that makes us that makes
sense but it doesn't do anything for the
site so again sort of tying back to my
earlier point bring value and not only
will your next link that you get from
that site be more worthwhile but you're
more like likely to get that second link
from that site because they want to work
with you they saw that you delivered
value last time so yeah totally I this
is something I've been thinking about
lately I'm wondering I know I'm just
keep I keep putting it out there it's
just this idea that in the past when it
came to links the idea was like getting
that first link matters the most from a
website and then everything after that's
kind of like diminishing returns like
getting a second third fourth link
wasn't really the priority so people
would get a link and then they'd go on
to the next and I think we're if we're
not already in this day I think we're in
the day soon where Google sees the
importance of to Authority websites like
linking back and forth to each other
over time versus like oh I got that one
link from whatever insert like Authority
website here like in 2013 and then they
never linked me again Google is gonna be
like why haven't they linked to you in
six years that's weird
like if you guys were if they really had
like a if your web sites were really
tied together with any sort of like
sharing of authority that should matter
and I think what they'd want to see is
you know a link from my website to log
annex and then you link to me and then
we link to each other in this month and
then six months later there's another
link and it just goes back and forth
over time and you see this like you know
like how Facebook shows you like this
day in the past kind of thing like you
can see this like long relationship if
we just look at the backlinks back and
forth and I think it becomes this point
where like we do want that relationship
where I want a link from from you or
from anybody and then it's like but I
also want that second one and that third
one and like eventually you just have a
relationship with you I know this sounds
weird cuz like I mean I'll speak for
myself but I feel like we're all just
like a bunch of nerds and then you tell
people like you got to talk to people
and everybody's like Axl's I don't know
about that so like you're not a nerd
I'll be deterred but like you know it's
just I don't know what do you think
about that do you think there's anything
there yeah I sure to be totally honest
with me there may be however I think if
we were to look beyond just the SEO
value of that of that placement you know
if I had a bunch of links coming from
say Mike Blumenthal's web site
Blumenthal's com that would have more
than just an SEO value people would be
following those links and potentially
you know hearing about me for the first
time and potentially buying some of my
wares so they're you know as we're
looking as you go down the rabbit hole
and get pickier and pickier about these
web sites what you find is the web sites
actually end up sets and
referral traffic and you didn't expect
that because you know for me I come from
a world of where that really didn't
matter too much it was just about that
ranking is it gonna help me rank because
I'm concerned about the traffic that's
gonna come from the cert not the traffic
that you know may come from you know a
referring domain so as you get pickier
you start seeing these this this
referring traffic and and in that case
yeah relationship with these sites you
know even I told somebody the other day
they said they're asking for some advice
about you know building their own
outreach team I said and they said you
know I want to supplement using you guys
and I said well what you should do is as
yes you're because you're an agency as
we're doing this for you as we're
supplementing and as you're building
your own team grab those domains that
that I'm building for you or grab you
grab the domains that I'm building for
you add those to your rolodex and start
reaching out to them and start building
your own relationship with them and
eventually you'll have your own contact
there and then you can use that same
link for another client down the road
should you have somebody who's also sort
of a niche match so I am a big believer
in building that that rolodex you never
know when that's gonna come in handy and
it's worth the heck of a lot I would
think yeah for sure Adam really
appreciate your time man thanks for
coming on hundred days of SEO it's my
pleasure it was a lot of fun
thank you of course